Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger in today's video I
want to have an informal look at some interesting
modern developments that are in the direction of
the kinds of results we've been thinking about
in terms of Archimedes theorem for the area
of a triangle Brahma Gupta is formula for the
area of a cyclic quadrilateral and we're going
to look at extensions of that to other cyclic
polygons and then also two volumes of polyhedra in
three-dimensional space so we're going to look at
Robyn's formulas we look at something called the
bellows conjecture and we'll be looking at volumes
of polyhedra we need a lot of interesting formulas
and part of the aim is just to give you an
overview but to get you thinking that the rational
point of view is really the right one and give you
some kind of experience in terms of the kinds of
algebraic relations that naturally come up in very
natural geometrical situations and we're going
to be mentioning quite a few people today Robbins
tartaglia Euler koshi Connelly sabotage amongst
others as well okay our starting point I suppose
is really this classical formula for the area
of a triangle in the plane in terms of the three
quadrants a--'s of the sides these are not the
distances they are the squares of the distances
well better yet the distances are the square roots
of the quadrants is so this was a reformulation of
heron's formula restated in purely in terms of
rational quantities that 16 times the square of
the area can be expressed to this polynomial
relation between the three quadrants is q1 q2
and q3 and this is what we called Archimedes
function of q1 q2 and q3 and it really has its
origin in the one-dimensional theorem the triple
quad formula giving us the relationship between
the three quadrants is formed by three collinear
points that's the case when this actually equals
zero so this is really the starting point we're
looking at various generalizations of this in
various different directions and then the next
development in this direction was Brahma gupta's
formula which we restated and call it the cyclic
quadrilateral quadri a theorem it concerns a
cyclic quadrilateral a1 a2 a3 a4 and its various
quadrants is q1 to q2 3 q 34 and q1 for we want
to express the area of this cyclic quadrilateral
in terms somehow of these four quadrants a--'s
so the crucial ingredients in the the formula
is first of all what we call the quad rhea of
the rectangle which was 16 times the square of the
area that same object that occurred in Archimedes
theorem and then there was a thing called M which
was the sum of the various cues all squared minus
2 times the sum of the squares of those quantities
and PE was the quadruple quad formula applied to
these four quantities and that can be expressed
efficiently in terms of em exists was a key
ingredient in that so you take this quantity am
here and you square it and then subtract 64 times
the product of the 4 q's then you get the quantity
P and then in terms of these we can say that here
is the cyclic quadrilateral quality Oh theorem
it's this real quadratic relation that a squared
minus 2m a plus P equals 0 and it's a little bit
novel because it doesn't give us a formula for a
exactly it's not a equals sum expression it's
a quadratic equation that has a in it and the
quadratic aspect really is a reflection of the
fact that there is in general two different kinds
of quadrilaterals with the same four quadrants
a--'s one convex like this and another one
non-convex in different shape so this formula
is valid for both the convex and the non convex
quadrilaterals and it means that we don't have to
distinguish between these different geometrical
configurations the algebraic formulation here
covers them both so a very natural question is
what is the analog of Brahma gupta is formula
for cyclic Pentagon's so if we imagine having
five points a1 a2 a3 a4 a5 and the five bars or
linkages that connect them so imagine a rod of a
certain length or a certain quadrants q12 and then
another one Q two three q 3 4 q 45 and then back
to Q 15 then that configuration of rods of course
is very flexible forms all kinds of pentagons in
the plane but if we insists that it sits inside
a circle then it's somehow constrained and all
there's still various possible ways of sticking
inside a circle there is only a finite number
of ways of doing that and that's called a cyclic
pentagon a natural question is what is the area of
such a thing where we use this generalized formula
for the area which is the purely algebraic formula
that we've seen with a lot of 2 by 2 determinant
kinds of expressions added up well I think the
first person to to seriously investigate this is
the great German geometers oddest Ferdinand Mobius
also famous for having introduced the möbius
band and he lived from 1792 1868 made important
contributions to 19th century geometry in 1828 he
wrote a paper where he realized that again this
same quantity a which was 16 times the square of
the area satisfied a polynomial equation of degree
7 with coefficients which are symmetric functions
or polynomials of the quadrants a--'s so he had an
argument for the existence of such a polynomial
relation but he could not write it down or maybe
he didn't write it down it was a quite onerous
but he certainly knew that there would be some
relation like this but very curiously of degree 7
and it's involving these five quadrants a--'s and
symmetric functions or symmetric polynomials of
these five quantities it was really a first time
I think that somebody really made significant
progress to this question the cyclic Pentagon's
area in 1952 F Bowman investigated the situation
and made some additional discoveries he knew about
Mobius as work and went further he started to look
at other quantities involved in the story so if we
have a cyclic Pentagon then there's also well of
course the radius of the circle that contains the
polygon for us we would rather think in terms
of the quadrants of that circle in other words
the quadrants between the center and any point
okay but he was working in the usual real number
framework thinking about the radius of the circle
and he was also interested in the diagonals so
these other segments that join two points on the
pentagon which are not sort of directly adjacent
and he realized that you could also write down
various equations that relate these things also
to the quadrants a--'s and something that figured
prominently in his work was a famous theorem goes
back to the ancient Greeks so-called ptolemies
theorem that involves all six quadrants 'as of
a cyclic quadrilateral okay that appeared in the
mathematical gazette but he didn't actually write
down the relation satisfied by the area in terms
of the quadrants a--'s of the sides so in 1995
david robbins came up with explicit formulas for
the polynomial relations that are involved here in
terms of the area so he gives an explicit formula
for this relation in order to write it out i have
to tell you just a little bit about the elementary
symmetric functions of the five quadrants ha's so
here we have these five numbers okay and we can
form various symmetric combinations of them the
simplest symmetric combination is just the sum
and that's called Sigma one that's a symmetric
linear combination of these five numbers something
else that you can do is you can take what's called
Sigma 2 which is sum of all possible products
between two different cues so Q 1 2 times Q 2
3 and then you add q 1 2 times q 34 and then add q
1 2 times q 45 and you go through all the various
possibilities of choosing two out of the five qs
taking your product and adding them all up that's
called a second symmetric function and then the
third one is the same kind of story where you take
all possible 3 q's different ones and multiply
them together and then you add up all those
possible products so for example q1 to q2 three
times q 3 for the product of these three then the
next one might be the product of these three and
so on you go through all possible combinations
just five choose three combinations you add them
all up and get Sigma 3 to get Sigma for you go
through all possible products of four of them
well there's only five such possible products
because you can multiply these four together
by just forgetting about that one where you can
multiply these four together forgetting about that
one and so on it's five possibilities and finally
Sigma five is just the product of all five all
right so these are called the elementary symmetric
functions of these five quantities and they figure
prominently in robbins formulas in fact mobius
also clearly appreciated that these were going to
be very important ingredients in the in the story
all right so what was Robin's formula for the quad
Rhea of the cyclic Pentagon well again as before
this is 16 times the square of the area for some
reason this particular combination with the 16 in
front of it and the square of the area is somehow
the natural kind of quantity that these formulas
want to use all right so that's called a and now
Robins defines some various secondary qualities
called t2 t3 t4 t5 and they are expressed in
terms of well a the quadra and also these various
symmetric functions of the quadrants Azure the
sides but they're also then in terms of previous
tease so first we define T 2 and then t3 has a
t2 involved at t4 is a t2 squared and so on so
we define these quantities here and then here
is a relation satisfied by a ok so there's a T
sub 4 cubed so this thing cubed plus this minus 16
that minus 18 and here there's another a appearing
minus 27 a squared T sub 5 squared all of that
equals 0 this is a degree 7 relation in a may
not look like it's degree seven but if you look at
this term here this is T for all cubed and t4 has
a t2 squared in it and t2 has an A in it so this
quantity here is quadratic in a if we cube it it's
degree 6 in a and multiply it by another a means
its degree 7 and that's in fact the only degree
seven term so it's actually a monic relation
in terms of a of degree seven ok it's very
remarkable formula sort of a tour de force and
Robbins obtained it in rather indirect way through
very clever usage of actual explicit examples
and writing things down carefully and using a
computer to make a whole series of equations and
then solving them so very indirect but interesting
approach in fact he also gave a similar formula
for the quad really sick like hexagon in fact
it looks somewhat similar for a heptagon or a
septagon seven sided figure I'm not sure if if
it's actually known I know that he was working
on it when he when he passed away not too long
ago he also showed that for cyclic m'gann's if
we generalize to the general case that there is
in fact a similar formula must exist but what
it was of course isn't not so easy to say and
he conjectured that for odd polygons that the
degree should form some some reasonable pattern
here there was a formula sport but in fact this
was already known by mobius and understood by
Bowman also earlier so very tantalizing kind of
story that there are these formulas out there
they are increasingly complicated degree they're
probably very significantly challenging to write
down but with our modern computers which are very
good at dealing with these kinds of expressions
even if there is hundreds or perhaps thousands
of terms our computers can deal with this so
we're sort of in a position where we can start
possibly exploring these kinds of very subtle
but deep relations is a very deep phenomena here
okay and it's it's very interesting that it really
has the same kind of form as the brahma gupta
form that we wrote down and it's ultimately all
about this quad Rhea in terms of the quadrants
ha's of the sides so when we write it this way
it's all a completely rational phenomena there
are no square roots that are necessary and it's
it's all really algebra that is very interesting
and deep algebra effect okay so now let's move to
three dimensions and sort of corresponding kinds
of questions for three-dimensional analogs of
polygons which are called polyhedra okay so these
are three-dimensional shapes that are made out of
finite number of points then you should take the
convex hull of those finite number of points or
another way of thinking about them is your things
that are tained by taking polygons rigid planar
polygons and putting them together so that any
two polygons if they do meet meet along the side
or maybe at a vertex all right so this is a very
interesting kind of mathematical object we are
going to be talking more officially about such
things and their volume but let's suppose for the
sake of this discussion that you have an intuitive
understanding of what volume means in fact turns
out that volume is a is a very interesting and
somewhat delicate thing to pin down but so let's
just take an informal approach here okay so
a natural question is given a polyhedron like
perhaps this simple one this is a call to
tetrahedron that's four vertices what is its
volume what is its volume not in terms of the area
of the base and the height but suppose that we
know only the side lengths or better yet the side
quadrants asst can we figure out just from knowing
say q1 to q2 three q3 for q2 for q1 for and q13
there are six please quadratus we know those
six numbers then we feel that the tetrahedron is
determined so its volume is determined and there
should be some way of expressing that volume
in terms of those six numbers remarkably there
is such a formula and it goes back to a very
remarkable fellow his name was tartaglia who
lived from forty nine nine to fifteen 57 and his
name is usually famous in the context of solving
a cubic equation he was in fact the first person
to have discovered a formula for solving cubic and
there's this famous story of him and his friend /
rival cardinal and you know fight a priority over
this formula but I think he deserves at least as
much fame and glory for this remarkable formula
for the volume of a tetrahedron in terms of
the squared lengths or the quadrants a--'s of
the sides here it is okay so a hundred and forty
four times the square of the volume notice it's a
little bit like the 16 times square of the area
that we were talking about as the quadra of the
planar situation something similar is happening
here this particular combination turns out to have
this big but still beautiful polynomial expression
in terms of the cues alright so there's products
of 3 q's at a time and there's think about
12 of them and then we subtract products of
cues associated to a face so the product of the
quadrants is along every face and there's one two
three four of those and then there's these other
six terms involving something like 13 and the
opposite 12 before so this is a remarkable formula
that Tartaglia discovered and it has these days
there's other ways of writing in turn determinants
and various other ways but this is what it looks
like as a polynomial so it's a very intriguing
kind of formula and it's very interesting to
note that it's a polynomial in the square of the
side lengths so in fact we don't actually need
the notion of length or a distance to get at
this formula so classical geometers have known
for a long time in fact that quadrants is in many
situations really the natural quantity associated
to the separation of two points Tartaglia
knew that his formula clearly illustrates
the importance of quadrants tartaglia is formula
was rediscovered by Leonard Euler several hundred
years later and is often referred to as Euler's
result in fact in my book I attributed it also
to oil or mistakenly not knowing that tar tog
we had discovered it earlier the formula has
also been extended in other directions in the 19th
century kaylee and manga extended it into higher
dimensions using theory of determinants also very
interesting development Tartaglia is intriguing
formula naturally gives us the question is there
some kind of corresponding formula for other kinds
of polyhedra tart obvious formula only works for
tetrahedra formed by four points essentially the
simplest kinds of polyhedra what about more
complicated ones is there a similar kind of
formula that lets us figure out what the volume
of such a thing is in terms of the side quadrants
ha's for example here is well that's something
that's combinatorially like a cube it has eight
vertices and six quadrilateral faces but these
quadrilateral faces are not necessarily squares it
might be more general quadrilaterals and if this
is the vertex AI and this is the right aj then
here is the quadrants qij and there are then 12
quadrants 'as natural question is if we know those
12 quadrants is is there some way of figuring out
what the volume is well if you think about this
question one thing that might occur to you is that
there might be a potential problem because if the
phases themselves are rigid polygons which are
fixed beforehand just like in that construction
set poly drawn where you have faces of a very
particular kind so suppose that those are all
determined but if it's possible for us to take
two adjacent faces and move them with respect to
each other of course then the other ones might
also move with respect to their neighbors then
it might be possible for us to change the volume
without changing any of the faces and therefore
without changing any of the quadrants a--'s if
that was possible then there will be no way of
having such a formula for the volume because the
volume wouldn't be determined by the quadrants
a--'s fortunately there is a lovely theorem due
to the great french mathematician koshi nineteenth
century mathematician who did work in many
different areas almost single-handedly created
what we now call complex analysis but he also
made contributions to geometry and he show that
a convex polyhedron with fixed faces he is rigid
so if the phases themselves are prescribed their
shape and size is already prescribed then the
polyhedron itself is rigid and does not allow any
flexing between adjacent faces that's true if the
polyhedron is convex if you have some experience
playing with Polly drawn or something like it
you will have an intuitive feeling for this
because when you create one of these poly drawn
polyhedrons what happens is that at the initial
stages when there's only a few pieces there's
still a lot of give in the various sides because
they're only connected along the Seine so there's
a lot of flexibility and as you start approaching
closing the thing up things become less and less
flexible till by the time you put that last piece
in the whole thing is completely rigid so that was
co she's theorem but there was this caveat that it
was only working for convex polyhedron and I
remind you that means informally that if you
have any two points say on the polyhedron then the
line segment joining them is entirely within the
polyhedron doesn't move outside so then in 1977
an interesting twist occurred robert connolly an
american mathematician discovered a non-convex
flexible polyhedron he discovered a polyhedron
which was not convex so that if you were looking
at its sides at some point so the sides or come
in and then come back out again so it's like that
has a dent inside it so it's still a polyhedron
made out of flat polygonal faces but it was such
that it actually flexed you could actually move it
some of the faces would move with respect to each
other so the whole thing would move it was very
interesting and it intrigued to the mathematical
community very much and shortly after his
discovery other people started investigating came
up with simpler examples so there's an example of
Stefan looks something like this it has a not too
many sides and you can actually make this out of
cardboard and flex it and see that it actually
works so people did that they made these things
out of cardboard and they SAT there flexing these
things and they noticed something interesting
that when you flexed one of these things so some
part kind of moved in but at the same time other
parts moved out and as you did this flexing it
appeared as if the volumes of these polyhedron
were remaining roughly the same it wasn't the
case that they were getting sort of smaller or
larger so they did experiments by poking holes
and blowing cigarette smoke or something like
this inside one of these things and then seeing
what happens as you flex them so if the volume was
going to get smaller than you would expect that
as you flexed there would be smoke coming out of
the hole be like a bellows and they noticed that
this didn't happen the smoke did not come out of
the little holes and it's strongly suggested that
perhaps the volumes in fact were being preserved
and this became known as the bellows conjecture
when a flexible polyhedron flexes its volume stays
unchanged so I think was Connelly and Sullivan
that came up with this conjecture very intriguing
well this was established eventually in 1995 by
I sabotage who deduced it as a consequence of
remarkable formula for a volume of a polyhedron
he basically answered the question that we asked
in the previous slides and discovered that in fact
there was a polynomial relation satisfied by well
not the volume but the square of the volume
of a polyhedron if the polyhedrons of a fixed
combinatorial type so we have a polyhedron
that's looking perhaps like a cube maybe a
cube with quadrilateral sides instead of square
sides but combinatorially a cube so if you take
one of those fixed combinatorial types then the
volume satisfied a polynomial equation very much
same kind of equation as Robins had discovered for
this cyclic Pentagon's and hexagons so the volume
satisfies a polynomial equation whose coefficients
are symmetric functions of the side quadrants 'as
once again these relations that are occurring
are purely expressed in terms of the square of
the volume and the quadrants 'as of the sides so
naturally the mathematics here seems to be wanting
to express itself rationally and because sabotage
was able to determine that such a relation exists
he was able to deduce that if you change the
position of things but keep the quadrants is the
same well then that volume can't change because
the relation is not changing if the coefficients
are symmetric functions of the quadrants a--'s and
the quadrants a--'s aren't changing it's a very
elegant and powerful way of solving the bellows
conjecture but also opening up a wide new arena
for investigation namely what do these polynomial
relations look like for a tetrahedron we know it
goes back to tartaglia what happens if you take
an octahedron or a cube or an icosahedron what
kind of relation does the square of the volume
satisfy with respect to the quadrants a--'s of
the sides well sabotage was only able to work out
these relations in very special cases for example
certain types of octahedra and so this question is
still very much open question about what kinds of
polynomial relations are we getting here but we
see throughout this story that there's some kind
of consistency here that goes back to Archimedes
formula for the area of a triangle through to
robins and sabotage polynomial relations there's
a kind of a consistent story that really is
suggesting to us that we should think rationally
and algebraically about these kinds of questions
that it's the quadrants is and not the distances
which are naturally involved and classical
geometers have known this for a long time but
somehow remarkably most people have referred to
these quadrants 'as not as something separate
deserving its own name but always in terms of
the square of the distance which is logically
week because it's actually the distances which
are problematic the distances involve the square
roots well the quadrants azhar purely algebraic
we also learned that worrying about ordering is
not really necessary the algebra sort of takes
care of things but we also have to be prepared
for very big polynomials there's serious issues
about how do you work with these things until a
few decades ago it really was very challenging
to to try to work things out that's why mobius
had had a problem writing down these relations
because he didn't have a computer helping him he
did he probably would have been able to write down
these relations and also suggest that we need to
learn a little bit more about symmetric functions
which are playing a natural role here and seem to
be sort of interesting objects on their own right
so we've touched base on a number of interesting
recent developments I hope you're getting the
idea that adopting a rational algebraic point
of view can have lots of advantages and can be
very natural at least when it comes to doing
certain types of geometry so the problems that
we've been thinking about here deserve to be
studying a little bit more depth and I will
talk about them the some of them in the famous
math problem series in my next video I want to
go back to the Brahma Gupta formula and I want to
actually prove it for you in a somewhat novel and
powerful way and to do that I'm going to introduce
something else which is very important which is a
projective view or projective parameterization
of conex so we're going to bring into now the
story the projective line we've been talking a lot
about the a fine line measuring there now we're
bringing this other side of geometry and see that
it also plays in a very important role and it's
going to allow us to create some mice formulas
and apply them to actually have a completely
solid proof of the Brahma Gupta formula which
we're calling the cyclic quadrilateral quadri
a theorem I hope you'll join me for that
i'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening
you